[Music]
This is business breakdowns.
Business breakdowns is a series of
conversations with investors and
operators diving deep into a single
business. For each business, we explore
its history, its business model, its
competitive advantages, and what makes
it tick.
We believe every business has lessons
and secrets that investors and operators
can learn from and we are here to bring
them to you. To find more episodes of
breakdowns, check out join colossus.com.
All opinions expressed by hosts and
podcast guests are solely their own
opinions. Hosts, podcast guests, their
employers or affiliates may maintain
positions in the securities discussed in
this podcast. This podcast is
forformational purposes only and should
not be relied upon as a basis for
investment decisions.
This is Matt Russell and today we are
breaking down the real estate broker
Compass. We have Jeff Colette, founder
of AON Capital Partners back as a guest.
You may remember his breakdown on
Goosehead and we thought it was fitting
to cover another flavor of a broker.
Now, Compass itself is a fascinating
business and historically a
controversial stock. It was founded in
just 2012 by Robert Refkin and Compass
has scaled in that short period of time
to become the largest real estate
brokerage in the United States. So Jeff
and I cover the history, some of those
early pivots, but I'd argue most
importantly, we get into the critiques
of Compass, whether those are fact or
fiction, what has changed since the
early days, and whether it's agent
commissions, operating leverage in the
business, the Zillow suit, there is a
ton of interesting stuff around Compass
today. And that's before you get into
the tech stack, the infrastructure, the
idea of controlling such a large
percentage of the market with top
agents. It's a very fascinating story.
It's one I will definitely be watching
closely moving forward. And Jeff's
insight here, I think, is particularly
interesting in terms of how he frames
this business, the opportunity, and how
you could see a broker potentially
emerge from being historically a
commodity business to maybe something
more powerful than that. So, please
enjoy this breakdown of Compass.
All right, Jeff, we have you back to
talk about a brokerage again. This time
looks a little different than Goose
Head. We have Compass which is in the
real estate space. We can get to how
different this is and all the nuances of
real estate, but I thought a good place
to start would just be the simple
description of Compass that you would
give to someone walking on the street.
They understand what a real estate
broker does, but what is Compass out to
do differently? What was the ethos of
what makes Compass a little bit
different than the rest of the real
estate brokers out there? And if you
were to describe the value prop to
agents or for the business, how would
you best capture that?
>> Yes, absolutely. At its core, Compass
really has four key advantages that
reinforce each other and are advantages
for its agents. The first being its
proprietary fully integrated software
platform. Second, the national scale
that it has. Third, a dense network of
top agents. And lastly, exclusive
listing inventory depth. Just to quickly
hit on these. Firstly, starting with the
platform, they're the only major
brokerage that's built this endto-end
software stack. Everything from CRM to
marketing to transaction management,
integrated together in a mobile first
way that's designed specifically for
agents that are very often on the go.
They get more done in less time with
less support staff. and the brokerage
itself that ties into the software runs
more efficiently. Importantly, this
gives them a very unique edge when it
comes to AI because it controls that
platform across the different point
solutions and the data. It can do things
that others can't like automate not just
content creation but workflows,
followup, and client engagement. They
have a major AI initiative that's in
beta this summer that will go full
release by the end of the year that has
voice activated assistant capabilities
that could really bend the curve on the
value proposition. The company's
invested nearly $2 billion inception to
date on technology and they captured a
point in time in raising capital to do
this that likely won't present itself
again for a competitor to do something
similar. The next thing is its national
scale. It's got nearly 40,000 agents in
virtually every major US metro. This
ties into the platform because it gives
them a cost advantage. It allows them to
amvertise this R&D investment across a
increasingly broad base of agents and
continually reinvest in the technology
as well as programs and services that
the agents are specifically asking for
them to build. So the scale and tech
platform really go hand in hand
strengthening each other. And then
there's the top agent network. This is
important. Compass has more top agents
and teams than any other brokerage.
about 18% of the top 10,000 and that's
50% more than the next closest
competitor. Why this matters is because
top producers drive the business. The
top 20 agents do roughly 85% of
transactions in the industry. They like
to work with one another and that
creates a powerful referral engine. On
average, Compass agents generate 18% of
their business from referrals within the
Compass network. that boosts revenue per
agent, retention, and recruiting. I
believe that's at the high end of the
market in terms of referrals. And then
lastly is the exclusive listing
inventory depth. So, Compass has leaned
into an inventory strategy and a phased
marketing program that helps sellers
test pricing and timing before going to
MLS, giving them more control and also
giving buyers early access. This avoids
issues around days on market price drops
and gives Compass agents an edge when
competing for listings. At the end of
the day, what Compass is aiming to do is
not compete on commission splits, but an
offering that really enhances the agents
ability to grow their business more
profitably and create better client
outcomes. And so, I think that that is
not always well understood. It's the
classic technology disruption story in
terms of how it was laid out and it's
still a relatively young history. I
think there's been a lot of pivots. Can
you just bring us back to maybe the
earliest chapter, some overview of the
founding story? I think what you just
mentioned there captures a lot of what
they were out to do, but there's the
idea of providing technology and all of
this to agents and then there's the
execution of it. So, anything that you
could touch on just in terms of the
early days of Compass, one day we'll
look back and still consider this the
early days, but just the founding story
and the origins here.
>> The original business model was focused
on rentals in New York City. They
quickly pivoted the business early on to
focus on traditional home sale
brokerage. I think the vision has
largely stayed the same. What they
needed to do was really effectively
attract a lot of high producing agents
and build the technology that supports
them alongside one another without
really having that foundation in place
to begin with. And they did that with an
immense amount of venture capital
funding and went to market in a manner
that was hard for existing brokerage
models to compete with in terms of
lucrative sign on bonuses, multi-year
contracts that would be very
advantageous to the agent. And that was
likely necessary because they needed to
build up a local market presence in
order to attract more agents and then
eventually transition the model to be
more sustainable. And so I think for a
number of years there was a big open
question as to the sustainability of the
model, whether or not the technology was
really going to prove out. And I think
that that conceptual
question mark remained with the company
for a long time until it really proved
things out much later in its life cycle.
Yeah, it's interesting when you consider
capital intensive businesses and you
think about infrastructure. This might
have been capital intensive in the early
days for talent. Something that we're
seeing in some other markets right now,
but at least it makes sense to me in
terms of bringing people onto the
platform. Like you can build it, but
they won't necessarily just come here.
When do you think things started to
shift a little bit just around financial
hygiene transitioning a little bit away
from just paying the most for agents?
I'm oversimplifying but you know to give
you some context were there any
milestones or things in the history that
really led to a change with that
mindset?
>> Yes, absolutely. So, I think that the
housing market downturn that began in
the early to middle part of 2022
was the true test for the company and
its approach. Just for context, mortgage
rates quickly spiked from under 3% to
over 7% and home sales precipitously
dropped from about 6 million to around 4
million, a level that it's been at for a
few years and really the lowest level in
30 years. And so Compass needed to react
quickly and it did. By the middle of
2022, it had paused market expansion. It
stopped M&A. It had to execute three
rounds of layoffs within a year. It
eliminated all agent incentives. And as
part of this brought on a CFO Coloni
Reitz who played an instrumental role in
decreasing the level of opex that the
company had from a level of 1.5 billion
run rate to around 850 million. So
nearly cut in half. But the company
actually didn't have to stop investing
in its platform. Around the same time,
actually the full capabilities
for an agent to be able to do their
entire workflow on the platform actually
coincided with this time frame. By late
that had been rolled out, both the
company and the market could see the
validity of the model. And perhaps
surprising to some, without those
incentives, and not just incentives to
have agents join, but they were having
these multi-year incentives roll off.
And they were able to maintain organic
agent growth and very high levels of
retention around 90% for principal
agents. And really the
technologyoriented
value prop was able to kind of stand on
its own by early 2023.
The company had sort of been proving out
this new ability and had started to get
to a point where it was operating around
free cash flow break even and was really
positioning itself to go back on the
offense after being really focused on
the cost cutting and stabilizing the
business in this new environment.
>> Yeah, it's a really interesting time
period. I think we're going to look back
on 22 and 23 and reflect on companies
that swallowed the pill, got operating
hygiene, and kind of reoriented
themselves to an environment that wasn't
just pure capital influx and spend on
whatever you want to spend. And even
though we've seen some of that come
back, it's just very interesting to see
who's emerged with some more operating
efficiency. If you were to just take a
snapshot of Compass today, I think of
them as certainly a very successful
platform just in terms of the properties
they get and this is in very particular
regions specific to me. But do you have
any headline numbers just around their
market share or anything else that could
give a sense of the size and scale today
in the market?
>> Compass operates the largest real estate
brokerage in the US by sales volume. It
has about 6% market share on a gross
transaction volume basis. It has around
21,000 principal agents and nearly
40,000 total agents across about 38
states in Washington DC. In 2025, it's
expected to generate close to $7 billion
in revenue and around $200 million in
free cash flow. Beyond its coreowned
brokerage, it recently expanded its
capabilities by acquiring Christy's
International Real Estate in January of
this year. That's a high margin global
franchise business that gives
independent brokerages a way to join
Compass without selling outright to
them. It's also built title and escrow
operations in a majority of its markets.
and it has a mortgage joint venture
that's still very early stages and not
financially meaningful, but over time it
could be very impactful to the financial
profile of the business. You certainly
confirmed what I thought just in terms
of market share. If they're the largest,
that speaks for itself. And then just
some numbers because I know it is
important. We'll get into more detail.
The targets that they have seem pretty
grand and ambitious. Can you lay those
out? And we'll talk more about them as
we go on just to set the ground.
>> I think one of the unique
characteristics
that I didn't highlight was really that
it's a national brokerage that actually
has a high level of concentration within
major markets. So, it's not everywhere,
but it has a very strong presence in
almost all the major cities within the
United States. So in the middle of 2024,
the company set a strategy 30 for30
whereby they wanted to grow its average
market share in its top 30 markets to
30% on average by the end of 2026.
At the time that they made that
announcement, they were probably about
halfway there. With the growth and the
M&A that they've done since then,
they're just over 20%, I believe. And so
I think that the real estate is a local
business and for them on this basis the
average number two competitor tends to
be in the singledigit range. And so with
the capabilities that they've been
building and the local market scale plus
its national presence, there likely
becomes certain elements of tipping
points where it becomes more easy to
attract more productive agents on a
local market basis as they become a
bigger and bigger market share presence
within those markets. It's interesting,
especially on a relative basis to a
number two or number three to see what
they're doing. I have this association
with Compass for luxury listings or at
least expensive listings. It might be
related to just the markets that they
operate in, but do you think that's a
fair categorization of Compass or am I
oversimplifying based on the markets
that they're operating in?
>> I think that that's generally fair. I
would sort of categorize it more as
premium. I think the average price for a
transaction for them is around a million
dollars. And over time, their strategy,
as we kind of hit on briefly earlier,
had been to launch in markets, attract
the highest producing agents that were
most influential to enable the company
to attract agents at lower levels of
productivity that have better commission
split dynamics. And that can kind of
cascade as the business and its presence
grows. And so I think that in certain
markets it has a higherend positioning,
but over time it's become more premium,
if that makes sense.
>> Yeah, it definitely does. Yeah, feels
like semantics in some way, but it
actually means a lot, especially as they
expand into other markets and you're
going to have this natural thing about
where the share opportunity is on the
industry as a whole. We were talking
prior to the episode just about all of
the nuances that make the real estate
industry real estate industry and the
brokerage model who they're impacted by.
Can you give your best breakdown in
terms of the major players particularly
as I think about the associations
and the organizations that tend to run
real estate behind the scenes. I know
they exist but however you would best
categorize and place them within the
industry just to give some background on
the market that they're operating in.
>> There are a few major players to
understand that dictate the structure of
the industry and play an influential
role on how business is conducted. So
you've got the National Association of
Realtors or NAR which is the largest
trade group in the entire country. It's
got about 1.5 million members. To access
MLS, the multiple listing service, the
essential database that agents rely on
to share listings and work together, you
must be a member of local, state, and
national realtor associations.
That mandatory membership effectively
ties agents into rules that actually
make the trade group more of a regulator
for the industry than many other
industries. That's really critical to
understand. And just a couple other sort
of relevant data points. The MLS is not
a national system. It's a patchwork of
over 500 local databases. About 80% of
them are controlled by realtor
associations.
For a long time, there was actually a a
built-in compensation offer where a
listing agent would actually show the
offer to the buyer's agent on the
commission that they would receive as
part of a transaction. That was just how
the industry worked. So, a buyer wasn't
actually paying their agent outright.
And then the last players to understand
are the consumerf facing portals such as
Zillow, Realtor.com.
They get their listings data from MLS
and then turn that into customerf facing
experiences. They're generally
monetizing leads to buyers, agents. And
the key thing to kind of understand
about all of this is this system
basically supported tens of thousands of
independent brokerages to compete and
created a dynamic where there's been
very limited consolidation. The top 22
brokerages in the country control about
25% of the volume. Around 60% is done by
firms with under $1 billion in gross
transaction value. And just as another
frame of reference, commercial real
estate is very different. It doesn't
operate under this structure. And there
you see a handful of large firms that
are much more dominant. Yeah, it's
interesting with the 6% commission fee
or maybe that's the cap of the
commission rate that could be paid on a
residential purchase. Is the governing
body nar in that case? Where does that
originate from? and we can get into a
little bit more of the nuances to it.
>> I think there's a little bit of a
misnomer around the 6%. The average
commission in the US hasn't been at that
level for quite some time. I think from
through 2020ish it gradually came down
from around 5.3% to closer to 5%.
Interestingly, it kind of ticked up a
little bit in 2023. The listing side has
kind of remained 3%. that's standard in
most markets. Whereas the buy side has
been really more of the area of
pressure. And so there's been changes
that have occurred that were headline
grabbing in 2024
that really impacted the way commissions
are set. They're always set by the
agents, but there was essentially a
landmark case. It's a bunette that
challenged the system that I described
earlier in terms of that offer
compensation within MLS. And basically,
there was a settlement that occurred
that created changes that happened
starting in August of 2024 now where
that offer of compensation doesn't exist
in MLS. And sort of importantly, there
are written agreements that need to be
entered into between the buyer and the
buyer's agent that have sort of created
some dynamics that are influencing some
of the market share dynamics I hit on
earlier, but really what we're seeing as
an output of this is not necessarily
what people expected. I think the
commission rates have remained very
stable as have the buyer representation.
What's occurring is a shift towards more
professionalism. It's hard to exactly
tease this apart because the industry's
been in this trough period, but buyers
agents are really having to articulate
their value to their client in a way
that they really didn't have to before
and compete to win on business.
Generally speaking, if you're
representing a seller, you're providing
them with a listing presentation. you're
competing with other folks who are
articulating their value in a way that
wasn't historically done on the buy
side. Now that is much more relevant and
sort of accordingly. If there are
brokerages that can convey value to the
agent and to the client in this new
setting, then that is also a powerful
dynamic that's creating more market
share shift to the most professional
agents. And just a couple interesting
tidbits to end on here is it's kind of
remarkable that 70% of agents who pay
MLS dues and were affiliated with a
brokerage in 2024 did zero transactions.
So, it's really been a market that is
shifting in certain ways. And I think
firms like Compass are in a position to
potentially absorb market share along
the dynamics I described, but also it's
more obvious to brokerages that
companies like Compass can actually
enhance their value proposition and the
combination of them can be compelling.
It's very interesting on the agent side
to hear that 70% data point because I
think it tells the story of what many
people think of which is a great agent
is worth their money multiple times over
but the large majority I think are
viewed as commodities and I don't know
that it's that hard to argue against
that on the buying side specifically.
One point of clarification, the previous
model, if I'm the buyer of the house,
you know, I buy the house, I don't think
about commissions. It was the seller who
entered an agreement with the listing
agent and then that listing agent
negotiates with the buying agent to
split or decide on that commission.
Under the new model, if I'm buying the
home, I'm entering an agreement upfront
about what commission I will pay on
that, and then the seller's doing
essentially the same thing on their
side. the cooperation dynamics that
still enable the seller and the payment
of the commission to not be a burdensome
factor for the buyer actually still
exists in the vast majority of
situations. That was kind of an open
question. That dynamic, it's still very
cooperative in that way. It's really
just that there was the potential for
like steering around whether or not
you're going to pay the buyer's agent a
certain amount. And so I think at the
end of the day the buyer's commission
could potentially be more around 2%.
3% and there are dynamics where there's
just more negotiation that's happening
versus things not even being front of
mind on the buy side. Yeah, I think
you've teased this out and it's
something we were discussing before
which I did not quite appreciate is the
importance of listings is kind of a core
asset or core differentiator within this
space. Can you riff on that a little bit
more about the importance of that within
the compass model and how they just
operate differently when it comes to not
only getting listings but marketing
those listings and everything that goes
into their approach which might look
different than other brokers. This is an
area that has gotten increased focus
more recently. Ultimately, inventory is
power in residential real estate. It's
what drives everything from agents to
platforms like Zillow. Without
inventory, there isn't business to
conduct. What's relevant to what you're
asking about is Compass has taken a
stance on pre-arketing. This sort of
fits back into the industry construct
that we were talking about earlier in
terms of
NAR MLS rules around listings. And to
level set a little bit, there's research
that shows that there's real demand for
offMLS marketing. The Illinois MLS had
on average 21% of its volume that
eventually went to the full market go
through its internal private listing
network that's available to all agents
and brokerages. And there's reasons why
consumers want to be able to do this.
their home may not be ready to be shown
yet. They want to understand price. In
today's market, around 40% or so of
listings are dropping their price. On
MLS and the portals like Zillow, it's
tracking days on market. It's tracking
price drops. Compass is taking a
position that it wants to be very
homeowner friendly and facilitate this
in a manner that provides flexibility to
customers. Even Zillow's studies have
found that 31% of sellers want to try
pre-arketing efforts. And so what
Compass has done starting last year is
create a program around this. It's
called the three-phase marketing
strategy. It's meant to give sellers
control and also buyers to have some
early access to homes and that can be
relevant in a market where there's been
a der of inventory that's come up more
recently. But the three phases are as
follows. There's the private exclusive
phase. The aim is really to validate
pricing and make adjustments before
going to the public and MLS without
being exposed to those metrics I
mentioned earlier. that's accessible to
Compass agents as well as their buy side
clients as well as other brokerages.
There's just been rules that have
constructed in the industry that prevent
a certain amount of marketing as it
pertains to this phase of marketing. But
Compass has a book that's available at
all of its offices that make it such
that those listings are available to
anyone that's aware of them. And when
they have a high level of market share
in a given market, it's not a secret to
folks that are participating in the
industry that these listings are
available and the outcome for sellers
can always benefit from co-broking. So
there's no effort to not cobra. The
second phase is coming soon. This is
where they can potentially generate
early demand on compass.com.
Build buyer interest and all of those
inquiries are going to the listing agent
who knows the property really well.
That's made searchable to consumers and
agents across the country. And then the
third phase is launching on MLS and the
public portals. And at that point,
ideally, you have a really strong sense
for pricing and confidence in kind of
how you're going to market so you can
get the best possible outcome. And it's
just worth noting that homebuilders,
this process is meant to sort of reflect
what home builders do to create demand.
And they're very sophisticated repeat
sellers of property who aren't really
putting all their inventory on MLS. Just
to quickly hit on this, like it's been a
little bit of a lightning rod for the
industry, but there are a number of
markets that facilitate this type of
program really well. And in Q1 about 50%
of Compass listings went through this
process. 94% of them still hit MLS. Like
the purpose is not to sell the property
in the private market, but the seller
can have varying degrees of what they
want to do in terms of the effort that
they put in to sell the house. And if
you can get top dollar and you don't
want to put in extra effort, that should
be the seller's discretion. They're
actually getting better pricing outcomes
for their customers. Listings using the
strategy sold for about 3% more on
average. And offers were accepted 20%
faster, about 8 days quicker to close.
And there were only 13% of these
listings with price drops versus 40%
more broadly. But just to sort of end on
this topic, other people in the industry
don't appreciate this practice and have
been voicing concerns that I think are
often times informed by their position
in the industry. And I just kind of
underline that there are markets like
Chicago that have been operating with
private listing networks as part of MLS
for over a decade. There are other
markets that offer similar things.
Austin literally just this past week
implemented something similar. There's a
notion here basically that there's a
place in the market to serve this need
that is not in violation of fair housing
and is also not meant to be
double-ending deals. It's really to
provide a better outcome for sellers,
but it challenges some of the business
models like MLS and some of the portals.
And so there's been a lot of outspoken
chatter about it.
>> I can certainly understand why MLS would
challenge it. For a portal, we'll use
Zillow because I think they have
publicly uh gone against this. If
Compass is making these available to
other brokers, then other brokers would
have access to these opportunities. Is
Zillow's challenge that they rely on the
MLS listings for what goes up on Zillow?
>> Just to step back, I think as a portal,
you want access to any and all listings
that you can get. You want to be the
one-stop shop to search for homes. So, I
think that's somewhat obvious. If you
just dial back the clock on the
industry, MLS's didn't really invest in
the same way that Zillow did to be able
to really be that source for searching
and support the customer in the way that
they wanted to. And really what's ended
up happening is the listings are going
to Zillow and the listing agents aren't
really necessarily benefiting all that
much because instead of getting direct
leads to them which can help them grow
their business over time, those leads
are being diverted to buyers agents. But
basically the background here and why
it's so important to Zillow is there was
a rule that came into play in 2019
called clear cooperation
and it basically forced listings into
MLS within 24 hours of any public
marketing. And so there was activity
that was happening leading up to that.
It was even coined by some as the
compass rule because in areas like San
Francisco, Compass had coming soons
where in a market where they have a very
high level of market share, they end up
being a place to be searching and it can
compromise some of these structural
dynamics that we've talked about
already. So basically in March of this
year in 25 after these settlements
occurred in 24 after increasing levels
of pressure but just keep in mind that
there's local level MLS that makes it
such that I reference Chicago there's
been different ways to go about things
in a compliant manner but basically it
came to a head in March when they made
some changes around clear cooperation
that created some flexibility around
pre-arketing in response to that. Zillow
created its own listings rules that
basically went above and beyond what had
been the clear cooperation rules and
basically said if you list your property
publicly and don't put it into MLS
within 24 hours, your listing will be
banned from Zillow. that phase two
encompasses three-phase process really
comes under pressure because you're
basically needing to tell a client or
the client needs to be aware if you're
going to market that property and you
want it to be on Zillow, you can't do so
for more than 24 hours. So basically the
ability for a brokerage to create an
ability to be a source of search is
impacted by this somewhat. But I think
the key thing to understand partially
about this is Zillow, it's a fight over
the top of funnel. Encompass is suing
Zillow in an antirust lawsuit. And so
there's aspects that we can get into
that. The stakes are pretty big, but I
would say the three-phase marketing
process can continue unabated. It's just
that phase two that's necessarily
impacted. And to the extent that
consumers choose to market their
property and not comply with that and
compliance and enforcement of that from
Zillow's perspective might be kind of
tricky. It could bifurcate the market
particularly with higherend homes where
people don't want their listings on
Zillow for privacy reasons or otherwise.
And then you've also got dynamics like a
newer portal homes.com that's owned by
CoStar Group that has a very different
business model where it's not buyers
leads, it's advertising for a listing
agent and they're basically providing
free advertising boosts for listings
that get banned from Zillow. So it's a
very interesting dynamic here that
ultimately I think if Compass wins out
or there's just increasing levels of
flexibility in terms of pre-arketing
that likely acrru to Compass's benefit
if the status quo persists nothing
really changes and so that's kind of how
I see it right now. Yeah, it's certainly
an interesting dynamic and it's hard to
separate fairness for the consumer from
companies and what benefits them.
Certainly, you can understand it from
all sides of the equation. I guess just
with Compass, do they ever split out how
much of their sales are done where it's
outside brokers are the purchasing
agents on their listings? Like, is that
anything they ever disclose? because I
do think it's one of those hot topics
where it's very easy to pin that as the
thing you want. You want to get both
sides of the commission. You know, if
you're an agent and that's an ideal spot
to be in, do they give you any sense of
what that looks like within their own
business?
>> There's not direct line of sight into
that. I just go back to the three-phase
marketing strategy. It's not the one
phase marketing strategy. And 94% make
it to MLS. Even those that don't, I
believe Compass has disclosed that the
majority of those that don't make it to
MLS are co-broked. You're talking about
a low singledigit percentage of the
overall transactions that are done
privately and double-sided. And so, I
think that that talking point that you
raise has been a key issue that folks
have taken. I would just reiterate
though as a home seller, you're looking
to execute on your objectives and it's
not the case that Compass is withholding
the listings from other brokerages.
There's just certain rules that actually
make it around that public marketing
dynamic that it's one to one to other
brokerages or that book that exists in
Compass's offices. So there are regions
like Illinois that have that private
listing network where it makes it
available to everybody and Compass is
very supportive of that being the
construct that works everywhere. It's
just a matter of these local geographies
choosing what's best. And I think it's
not always clear to just say we
represent what's best for the consumer
if you're Zillow or if you're another
constituent in the market because there
are different needs and desires for
different constituents that are selling
their homes. And so I think it's
probably likely that there needs to be
some level of flexibility that's created
in the industry. And I think places like
Illinois with Emrad create a positive
construct where I think the other
dynamic that flows from what you're
asking about is just this idea that oh
man, we'll have this market where
listings aren't available in a
centralized place and all of a sudden
this great market that was really
transparent ends up going into this
really much more difficult buyer
experience. And I just point to the
areas like Illinois and even other
markets that are more flexible to this.
There aren't huge issues in places like
that in terms of accessing the
inventory. So I think a lot of this is
overblown to be quite honest.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. It'll just be interesting to see
what flows from all this. And I think
one of the things that's probably worth
pointing out here is that Compass and
Robert Raffkins founder CEO like they
believe that they work for their agents
and their efforts to
create what they believe to be common
sense frameworks that enable their
clients and agents to have successful
outcomes. is a little bit of a rallying
cry for anyone in the industry that has
similar beliefs. There are definitely
people that don't agree with their
approach and I think that there's room
for different models to operate in
different ways. But what Compass has
seen is their agents in listings
presentations to go to the client and
say, "We're going to offer you this
capability that is built into our model
and makes it easy for you to go about
this in a flexible way." A lot of other
agents, particularly ones at brokerages
that are saying don't do this, are to
your point earlier, you kind of use this
commoditized. It helps Compass stand out
a little bit and win listings in a
manner that I think is important because
agents are competing with each other at
a local level on an everyday basis.
>> Yeah, it feels like a premium experience
without a doubt and I certainly see it
out there in the market. I found myself
in some of these distribution lists and
it's noteworthy to see how different it
looks. I want to transition a bit just
into the model itself. I think it's
fairly straightforward. They generate
fees based on commissions. I would
imagine that's going to be tied to the
housing market. Just thinking about
revenue and sales and putting aside the
market share changes. Is that the right
way to think about a real estate
brokerage business is correlation to the
housing market?
>> Yeah. Compass's core business is an
owned brokerage versus a franchise
model, which they now do have through
Christy's. But the owned brokerage is
really the following drivers. agents
times their productivity equals the
number of transactions that they're
doing. Compass has actually taken
organic market share in all 17 quarters
it's been a public company. M&A is an
additional lever for them. And then
those transactions times the average
home transaction price times the agent
commission rate and then the commission
split between the agent and the
brokerage is really the gross profit
stream that is so critically important
to understanding Compass's business
model
>> on the commission rate, the brokerage
split. Is there just a right way to
frame what that looks like in the
industry? How Compass may differ? I know
it's going to be nuanced based on agent
and all of that, but just some ballpark
in terms of the gross profit percentage
that Compass would take home net of
those commissions.
>> Yeah. So, on average for Compass, it's
roughly 82% going to the agent, 18%
going to Compass. To your point though,
there's a range around that on an agent
by agent basis. I believe there's around
a 9 percentage point difference in
splits for certain production levels.
It's important to understand the mix
dynamics here in terms of as Compass's
agent grows, it's likely mix shifting
away from the top 10% of agents towards
the top 50, improving overall margins
without actually changing commission
splits between the constituents.
Industrywide
agent splits had been trending in the
favor of the agent for quite some time,
but they've actually reached a level of
stability, I believe, for a few years
now since really the housing downturn
pulled out some of the dynamics around
the ability to do that, particularly in
the area of the market where Compass
plays. And I would also just say that
there's other business model types in
the space that offer even more generous
splits and or caps. Those often come
with less support, more out-ofpocket
costs for tools, marketing, training.
Those models will likely appeal to a
certain segment of agents, but clearly
not all of them. And what Compass is
really aiming to do is transcend the
value proposition away from just that
economic split to be around capabilities
that drive performance for the agent to
grow more profitably. And so that would
sum that up.
>> I think it sells the point on the
marketing plan and everything that goes
into that as well. If you can say if
you're a Compass agent, everything's
going to feel premium for your
customers, it does change the dynamics
and doesn't make each brokerage house
feel like a commodity. On the 82, do you
have any context for what the earliest
agents were looking at in terms of
commissions just to get a sense of how
much maybe that's come down over time? I
would probably just frame it as it could
be extremely lucrative for founding
agents in a market and there were often
multi-year financial incentives that
were part of the conversation in the
early days of Compass being a public
company that needed to expire
effectively. And that was the concerns
around what that would mean to the model
were very front and center from an
investor's perspective in 2122
for Compass because no one knew what the
level of retention and really what the
stable level of commissions
that would enable the company to
continue to attract agents would
And so I think that that resolved in
that downturn environment that we spoke
of earlier and has remained in kind of a
healthy place. Just to reiterate
something, I think ultimately what I
think what they can do is go to market
with competitive splits against
traditional brokerages that offer
support but provide extra value that
others have a difficulty replicating.
>> Yeah. rather than just compete on price
in theory for your talent. It makes a
lot of sense on the mechanics of
commissions. I know it differs from one
brokerage to the next, but are there
tiers like your first 1 million in
commissions are at this rate, above
that, they're at this rate. Is there any
change just in terms of how the
commission structure works in one
direction or the other?
>> There certainly are tiers at certain
players in the industry. I think it can
actually be pretty bespoke by agent and
by the level of volume that they do. The
frame of reference for Compass is just I
think they publicly stated there's a 9
percentage point differential between
certain bands that is really the way to
think about the mix shift over time.
Makes sense. You mentioned before free
cash flow generation in recent quarters
or years. What does the operating
leverage look like for this business?
Cuz I think it had the connotation of
taking in a lot of capital, spending
that capital, and then some seems like
there's been some inflection. But is
there inherent operating leverage in the
business? How do you frame that or think
about that as an investor? And if you
want to put some numbers to help explain
or contextualize, that's helpful. For
2025, the free cash flow margin percent
of revenue will be roughly 3% for the
business. Roughly $1.2 billion in gross
profit this year. That's at a high teens
margin. And there's roughly a billion in
OPEX and that includes almost $200
million of annual technology spend. I
think it's actually somewhat easy to
contextualize
the operating leverage and the
trajectory of the company based on the
discipline and framework that they've
put around it. So they've committed now
for I believe several years at this
point a and into the future to keep OPEX
growth at 3 to 4% annual increases. And
there's just inflationary dynamics that
feed into that. This quarter they
actually announced some cost savings
that while somewhat moderate flow
directly to the bottom line and can be
meaningful to profit dollars. I think
that they've they really found religion
around cost discipline in 2022 and
there's actually more potential for this
over time. Just think about the use
cases around document processing of
transactions. There's a good amount of
human intensity as it relates to this
that could come out of the system over
time with the advent of new technology.
And it's also worth noting that they've
acquired a company called App Properties
that came with the Christy's business.
They generate a high singledigit Ebida
margin and they're really great
operators. And so I think the idea
really is Compass can be the lowcost
operator for owned brokerage. And I
don't think that investors really think
of Compass in this way. And then just
depending on the rate of growth with
production basically at that high teens
margin which can grow with the mix shift
in agents as well as the attachment of
title and escrow and potentially
mortgage over time. the incremental free
cash flow margins can be in the double
digits and that can make it such that
not too high levels of growth can result
in very rapid free cash flow growth.
Yeah, it's very interesting when you
find these inflections or trajectories
that are clearly moving in a different
direction than they were once in on that
2 to 3% opex growth and more looking at
the technology spend. Does that
encompass what you were mentioning at
the very beginning in terms of investing
in the technology for the platform? I
don't know where this would fit whether
it would be in an opex line, a capex
line, wherever it might be, but how do
you frame that and the capital that
still needs to go towards that effort of
technology investment?
>> So, it's that close to $190 million line
that's inclusive of investment in new
capabilities. I think what's important
to understand about that is the industry
is at a trough level and there's been
this trend in commission splits and just
the level of scale necessary to invest
that makes it such that they stand alone
in their ability in their their stance
on investing. And so others are really
starved in an ability to do that and
really don't have a structure to even do
that. It's really a hodgepodge of
thirdparty software tools. I think where
this is going for Compass is actually
potentially really exciting because they
own all the software that's all
interconnected and all of the data which
makes it such that they've announced
some capabilities around AI that are in
beta stage that can actually end up
taking on a lot of the manual tasks that
an agent will do and and even
proactively suggest next best actions
that can transform the agents daytoday
life in a manner that could be very
differentiated and hard to replicate by
others in the industry.
>> Yeah, very interesting. I should have
looked this up beforehand, but I have to
ask with this particular cohort of
businesses, stockbased compensation is
always a focus. What does that look like
here? Is it a point of contention from
the market? Where does that stand?
>> Where it stands is it's basically a
fixed cost now in the business and their
approach to it is very similar as
overall opex such that it shouldn't grow
that materially from here on out. What
that means is free cash flow per share
should be very attractive. The name of
the game for them is really bringing on
productive capacity. They've designed
their business now in a way where they
can bring on agents, teams, brokerages,
the franchise affiliate model. They kind
of welcome folks joining their platform
in any way that best fits them. It's
that pace of gross profit growth over
the relatively fixed cost base including
the SBC. That's the framework here in
terms of the growth and achieving some
of those numbers that you laid out
before about that 30% in the 30 markets.
You have organic, your agents continue
to chop more wood and capture some of
it, but it sounds like M&A has been a
part of the DNA here for a while. How
much of the growth story do you expect
to come from acquisitions of brokerages,
brokerages, houses, whatever it might be
in terms of how they target?
>> I think it could be very material. Just
to kind of reiterate, the industry is
very fragmented. There have been changes
and we're in a trough environment that
make it difficult and make it that the
propensity for folks to want to enhance
their value proposition to be able to
grow is very real. And so you'll see
announcements somewhat often of smaller
brokerages joining really getting from
here to 30% market share will require
meaningful M&A. They've acquired
meaningfully sized brokerages in
Tennessee in Louisiana. The at
properties Christy's deal that was very
sizable that came with title and
mortgage joint ventures. That multiple
was nine times IBITA. With synergies
that are running ahead of plan, that
should bring it down to five to six
times. In general, they're targeting
four to six times IBITA. that could fall
to two to three times post synergy all
while keeping opex flat. And there's
also a dynamic where there are quote
unquote walkover situations where a
brokerage can shed its costs and join
Compass. And so I think that it's a very
central part of the go-to market
strategy. And I think that if you step
back and think about the advantages that
the company brings, plugging in
productive capacity actually has the
ability to strengthen the overall value
proposition and actually incent people
to join. Interesting. And then on the
risk side, I guess you just have general
macro risk. We talked before about
housing market and to the extent that
you had major downturns, it would
obviously impact the business. But is
there anything else that stands out? It
feels like what they're doing, I
wouldn't expect a competitor to try to
capture all this money, spend on tech,
spend on brokerages, maybe nip at the
heels a little bit, but is there any
other risk that really stands out to you
besides maybe some of the more obvious?
>> The foundational assumption is that the
agent remains central to the home
transaction. I think that in years past
there were companies and investments
made to disrupt that and that has
largely not panned out. Even in a
largely digital world, close to 90% of
home buyers use an agent in 2023. The
listing agent is probably even more
structurally sturdy. That 89% reference
is up from 83% in 2010. The truth is is
that residential real estate
transactions are an infrequent high
stakes situation where consumers
overwhelmingly prefer expert guidance. I
think where there's some risk to this is
in a world that has increasing levels of
AI capability, but Compass is basically
on the verge of arming its agents with
AI powered capabilities that should
actually be both offensive and
defensive. And so I think that that risk
is there, but has not shown to be overly
concerning. Then there's execution risks
on just their ability to grow and retain
productive agent capacity. They need to
continue to deliver meaningful value
with technology, training, support,
differentiate themselves beyond
commissions. The AI functionality here
could be very impactful to the overall
value proposition and the productivity
to agents. M&A, as you referenced
before, the execution there matters. I
wouldn't say that there's huge amounts
of integration risk associated with
this, but like culturally,
operationally, they want to bring on
folks that stay and perform. And the
other risks are relating to this
pre-arketing flexibility. I'd say that
the trend has been in the direction of
greater flexibility.
to the extent that that went the other
direction that would not help them
differentiate. And then from a macro
perspective, housing turnover and home
prices are really key. At today's level,
around 4 million existing annual home
sales, that's a 30-year low. Midcycle
about 33% higher. I think that there's a
lot more upside than downside there.
There could be temporary dislocations,
but mortgage rates are important. A
recession without inflation could
actually help mortgage rates. Consumer
sentiment and employment are also key,
but I think that we're kind of at a
trough cyclical level. And so there's a
lot more upside than downside from that
perspective.
>> A lot of points in there. I think the
agent retention and attracting the best
agents and even the dynamic of having
30% of a market means some agents in the
same territory. You can definitely get
synergies from working together, but you
can have some fierce battles as well
over some of these things. But it's an
interesting thing to monitor and I think
you've teased out the importance of that
in terms of their mission really well.
This has been very interesting. It's a
name I will admit I had a very specific
view on and as we've talked more and
more it's opened up my mind into the
reality of the situation. But we close
out these conversations as you know with
the key lessons that you can take away.
What stands out the most to you from
Compass in terms of a lesson or
framework that you could potentially
apply elsewhere?
>> A few thoughts for a lot of investors. I
think residential real estate brokerage
triggers an immediate hard pass. Low
margins, agent churn, regulatory
uncertainty, all these factors are very
understandable. But sometimes downturns
reshape companies in ways that are easy
to miss. Today compass is not the
compass of a few years ago. The housing
downturn forced it to find discipline
financially, strategically, and the
results are pretty consistent of them
outpacing the market, growing free cash
flow, increasing their margins, kind of
a clear strategy forward that's
relatively unique for the industry. The
stock is up 4x from its lows. I would
say that there's a few questions that
come to mind that will dictate the
future lessons learned. Has Compass
already reached a tipping point where
the strategy is already working and it's
really just the pace at which it's able
to grow that's the major question mark.
Was the downturn for housing the best
thing that could have happened for them?
How much potential upside do these court
cases that it's involved with have for
the company? And what's the real
downside risk? Has the trough
transaction environment created an
environment that allows them to stand
out even more from its competition
incenting them to join at greater levels
than they would otherwise? What other
brokerages are really competing on the
same terms? And how are their trends
looking relative to Compass? I'd say
long term if they keep executing the way
that they are and the market values it
accordingly does that open the door for
larger M&A transactions and longer term
if there's flexibility on pre-arketing
and Compass is able to achieve its
stated goals of market share could it
evolve into a home search destination
not just an agent platform and what
would the economic
situation look like then those are the
things that I'm watching and I really
appreciate the opportunity to have this
conversation with you today. Matt,
>> been a pleasure. Thank you again for
sharing the knowledge and maybe teasing
out the fact and fiction about a name
like compass. So thank you again Jeff.
To find more episodes of breakdowns
ranging from Costco to Visa to Madna or
to sign up for our weekly summary, check
out join colossus.com. That's j o i n o
ssus.com.
[Music]